docs/user-guide/teacher-content/index.md, before:

# Teacher content

VirtualShip is used as part of the VirtualShip Classroom, that combines authentic tools with VR to create a virtual fieldwork experience and allows you to teach about sea-based research from your regular classroom.

All VirtualShip Classroom (VSC) material is open under an MIT licence and freely available! You can use the VSC to teach anything from a 4 hour masterclass up to an open assignment of more than 40 hours. Example assignments are available below and please feel free to customize anything offline or [contribute](../../contributing/index.md) to the assignments provided here.

Our core learning outcome is for students to appreciate the difficulty of measuring the ocean, making the VSC a valuable tool for students that will go into fieldwork, modelling or anything else. Additional Intended Learning Outcomes [(ILOs)](ILOs.ipnb) were formulated in collaboration with ocean scientists from the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research [(NIOZ)](https://www.nioz.nl/en) and Utrecht University [(UU)](https://www.uu.nl/en).

The 360 videos are available on our YouTube channel [**_@VirtualShip Classroom_**](https://www.youtube.com/@VirtualShipClassroom) and in high resolution upon request. The videos can be viewed in the classroom or at home using:

- VR Headsets – Wear a headset and look around naturally by moving your head.
- Smartphones/Tablets – Move your device or swipe the screen to explore.
- PC/Mac Browsers – Click and drag with your mouse to look around.

The VSC design focuses on creating didactically sound, authentic learning experiences grounded in established learning theories in science education, such as constructivism [(Piaget 1954)](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315009650) and constructionism [(Papert 1980)](https://worrydream.com/refs/Papert_1980_-_Mindstorms,_1st_ed.pdf). By integrating realistic tasks and a gamified narrative approach within Jupyter notebooks, students learn within a digital replica of the real world, constructing knowledge through ‘learning by doing’ and ‘trial and error’ as they explore oceanography concepts, research methods, and analysis tools.

We evaluated in several (under)graduate courses and find that the VirtualShip Classroom is highly engaging, and students report on enhanced confidence and knowledge [(Daniels et al. 2025)](https://current-journal.com/articles/10.5334/cjme.121).

```{nbgallery}
---
maxdepth: 1
caption: Teaching material
---

ILOs.ipynb
```

Commit message:

Ocean of future (#227)
* add plotting materials to UU ocean of future directory

* rename course directory

* WIP presentation and tutorial handouts

* presentation updates

* update tut1

* update material

* add tutorial for set up on jupyter collaborative workspace

* add collaborative workspace setup guide to index

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

* add info about having to repeat steps if closing Terminal

* fix typo in path

* small edits

* add index for docs

* update GitHub references in conf.py to reflect correct organization

* small edits

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

* fix link formatting in index.md

* temporarily fix link

* add to do

* add schedule duration live monitoring notebook

* presentation updates

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

* presentation updates

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

---------

Co-authored-by: Emma Daniels <e.e.daniels1@uu.nl>
Co-authored-by: pre-commit-ci[bot] <66853113+pre-commit-ci[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Emma Daniels <135691556+ammedd@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/user-guide/teacher-content/index.md, after:

# Teacher content

VirtualShip is used as part of the VirtualShip Classroom, that combines authentic tools with VR to create a virtual fieldwork experience and allows you to teach about sea-based research from your regular classroom.

All VirtualShip Classroom (VSC) material is open under an MIT licence and freely available! You can use the VSC to teach anything from a 4 hour masterclass up to an open assignment of more than 40 hours. Example assignments are available below and please feel free to customize anything offline or [contribute](../../contributing/index.md) to the assignments provided here.

Our core learning outcome is for students to appreciate the difficulty of measuring the ocean, making the VSC a valuable tool for students that will go into fieldwork, modelling or anything else. Additional Intended Learning Outcomes [(ILOs)](ILOs.ipnb) were formulated in collaboration with ocean scientists from the Royal Netherlands Institute for Sea Research [(NIOZ)](https://www.nioz.nl/en) and Utrecht University [(UU)](https://www.uu.nl/en).

The 360 videos are available on our YouTube channel [**_@VirtualShip Classroom_**](https://www.youtube.com/@VirtualShipClassroom) and in high resolution upon request. The videos can be viewed in the classroom or at home using:

- VR Headsets – Wear a headset and look around naturally by moving your head.
- Smartphones/Tablets – Move your device or swipe the screen to explore.
- PC/Mac Browsers – Click and drag with your mouse to look around.

The VSC design focuses on creating didactically sound, authentic learning experiences grounded in established learning theories in science education, such as constructivism [(Piaget 1954)](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781315009650/construction-reality-child-jean-piaget) and constructionism [(Papert 1980)](https://worrydream.com/refs/Papert_1980_-_Mindstorms,_1st_ed.pdf). By integrating realistic tasks and a gamified narrative approach within Jupyter notebooks, students learn within a digital replica of the real world, constructing knowledge through ‘learning by doing’ and ‘trial and error’ as they explore oceanography concepts, research methods, and analysis tools.

We evaluated in several (under)graduate courses and find that the VirtualShip Classroom is highly engaging, and students report on enhanced confidence and knowledge [(Daniels et al. 2025)](https://current-journal.com/articles/10.5334/cjme.121).

```{nbgallery}
---
maxdepth: 1
caption: Teaching material
---

ILOs.ipynb
```

## UU Ocean of the Future

```{nbgallery}
---
maxdepth: 1
---
UU-ocean-of-future/Tutorial1.ipynb
```
